This is August 3rd, and we are at 27 Forest Drive in College Station, and I have the pleasure and honor today of chatting with Dr. Ann Marie Elmquist.
Would you say a sentence now just to test it?
All right.
Well, I'm really looking forward to the interview.
I apologize for it.
Dr. Almquist, to introduce yourself to someone who might listen to this tape or read the transcription, describe your background, where did you grow up, your family, where did you go to high school, and so forth.
Oh, wow.
All right.
I have actually lived most of my life in Texas, starting
with Austin, Texas, coming to College Station by way of Washington, D.C., Boston, Massachusetts, and what else?
I don't know, somewhere in Pennsylvania.
I actually got my elementary and secondary education in Europe, in France,
Czechoslovakia and Switzerland.
And after that as a teenager, young teenager, I came to Texas when my father had taken on a position at the University of Texas in electrical engineering.
He was an academic?
He was an academic.
Where did your parents grow up?
In France and in Czechoslovakia.
So here I was in Austin, ready to go to college.
And I went to the University of Texas, got my bachelor's degree, started on my master's, and the war came, and I got engaged to be married.
And one thing and another, I ended up in Washington, D.C., with no master's degree.
Anyway, I got a job with Army Intelligence, very interesting, four years of it, which was, by the way, a big help.
with all the military guys that I later had in class.
I have a couple of little certificates from the Army, and I displayed them in my office.
And I got a lot of respect after that that I might not have had otherwise.
Now your undergraduate degree was in what specialty?
My undergraduate degree was in French and German.
My master's degree was in French and English.
And I finished that after a number of years.
It took a while.
Four children, another job, the way it goes.
And eventually I ended up with a Ph.D.
at A&M.
In what special?
In Education Administration.
And you got married and those children?
Oh, I got married way back when, during the war.
And then I had four children.
So, actually, my degrees, like that of many women of my generation, was really spaced out.
It wasn't a one, two, three thing.
And I joined the faculty at A&M in 64 or 65.
Now, you all moved here what year?
Oh, we moved here.
My husband was on the faculty.
We came here right after the war.
My husband had been on the faculty before the war.
Oh, I didn't know that.
And got pulled up, you know, and sent to some kind of OCS.
Where did you all meet?
In Texas.
It was a blind date.
We met in Austin, actually.
And so we, in 45, at the end of 45, A&M was trying very, very hard to get its faculty back because of the influx of all the students coming back.
And so we got back to Texas, actually, rather quickly.
By December of 45, we were back at College Station.
And... Now, had you lived in College Station?
No, I'd never lived, I'd never been to College Station before.
Oh, okay.
That's an important.
What was your first, describe the College Station that you first saw.
Well, that was very interesting, because that was in December.
And we had come from Washington, D.C.
I always disliked the East Coast.
It's cold, wet.
And we came here in December.
And it was snowing, cold, and icy.
And I thought to myself, what's going on here?
I thought, while I was in Austin, I didn't have a winter like that.
So anyway, here I was.
And College Station hardly existed.
quite a few private homes.
Houses had already been built.
But no businesses, much of anything.
No restaurants, anything you wanted to go to Bryan for.
Now where did you all live at first?
College Park, corner of Ayrshire and Bell.
It was a very tiny house that my husband
I had built before the war.
It was 18 by 25 feet, the whole house.
But we stayed in it because it was sort of an in and out proposition.
After we'd been back home for two years, my husband or ex-husband or late husband, whatever, went back to Austin himself to get his Ph.D., finish his Ph.D., and finished it.
And I stayed here.
by myself for about two years and then the third year I went over there and finished my Master's.
What was it like those two years to be by yourself?
Oh it was great fun.
I had never lived like that before.
Here I was a married woman.
I'd never been living very much of a busy married life before.
And I had so many neighbors, everybody was nice, everybody had coffees every morning, and we got together with a whole group of people.
I was with the wives, of course, the Schlesemanns, whom you probably remember, and all that older group.
Skipper, what was Mrs. Schlesemann's name, do you remember?
I remember him as Skipper.
He's Skipper.
And geography.
Oh, Gwen.
Gwen.
Who else were among the most thoughtful to you?
the most kind.
You know, one of the nicest people whose name I cannot remember, I've been trying to remember it, when we first came here was a very, very nice Jewish lady.
whose uncle or father or somebody was a prominent rabbi in New York, who was just the sweetest thing.
She invited all the newcomers to her house.
She fed us.
She amused us.
That was at the time when Dr. Morgan was head of the English department with his wife Anna.
And they had all of us together all the time.
They were so friendly, but I cannot remember her name.
At first I thought, what am I going to do with my time?
I never had a lot of leisure time.
I went to school, and then I went to college, and then I got married and had a job.
All of a sudden here I will have no job.
That sort of worked out very well, though I had a good time.
After I went to Austin and got my master's degree, and then I finished writing my thesis, one thing and another.
Time went very quickly, and by the late 50s I was employed as a teacher.
Where?
In Bryan.
What was your salary?
Oh God I don't remember.
I really don't.
I also taught for four years, five years at Allen Academy.
Teaching English or language?
Latin and French.
And Latin was never one of my strong areas, but they needed a Latin teacher, and I wanted a job, so.
And your husband's department was what?
English.
English, yes.
Now, we were divorced in 67.
Okay.
And he passed away in 78, so he's oldest.
All right, so you had the four children.
I had the four children.
And where did you live after that first little house?
After that first house,
We lived in the country for a while.
And after that, we lived on Dexter, West Dexter, in the house that Ernest Langford had built for himself.
When they retired, the house came on the market, and we got it.
And we stayed in there for a number of years.
And at that point, we were divorced.
And I moved with my children into a house on Glade.
Now, I remember one time Fred Benson said way, way back that divorce was frowned on here.
Did anybody give you any difference?
Well, to tell you the truth, I'm concerned about what Dean Hubbard would say.
But actually,
Everybody just seemed to accept it.
It wasn't too bad.
Now, you were on the faculty?
I was on the faculty.
Particularly, I'd like to know, describe how you came to be an A&M faculty member.
Did you seek them?
Did they seek you?
No.
This was interesting.
One summer, must have been 64, Jack Dabbs called me.
He was then the head of the Modern Language Department, and said he was looking for somebody to teach two courses in summer school in French for the PhD people, reading course.
Would I be interested in doing that?
And I had no summer job, so I said, sure, that'd be interesting because I had to do it.
At the end of the summer, I was fully expecting to go back to Allen Academy.
These were all PhD candidates, presented somebody, whoever the dean was at the time, with a petition saying, I was such an outstanding teacher that the university would be stupid to let me go.
Apparently, Dean Hubert and Dr. Dabbs and whoever else got together and offered me a position.
Do you remember what the salary offer was at your beginning?
Yes.
That I always remember.
My first year I made $6,600.
And this is 64?
That was 64.
64.
And your title was?
Assistant Professor.
Because in history Dr. Nance made us spend three years as an instructor.
I sort of was able to do that because they wanted me.
I don't think I would have been able to do that otherwise.
Now as far as you were aware then, did it matter at all that you were a woman?
This wasn't a... I never felt that it was, really.
I was never made to feel that.
In other words, it wasn't... You know, we're always aware of the fact it might happen.
Of course.
But it really didn't.
Describe, as you joined the department then named Modern Languages, describe who was in the department then.
In the department, believe it or not, we already had some women.
But they were part-time lecturers.
I was the first woman to go in there with tenure rank or whatever, tenure track.
And it was a very small department.
There were about two or three part-timer women and half a dozen were sold.
And taught what languages?
I at that time taught both French and German.
And the department then also taught what else?
Spanish?
Spanish, French, and German, that was about it.
No Latin.
No Latin name, no.
And they taught Czech occasionally because of the Scrivani brothers.
It was not a regular
every year.
No Asian languages at all?
Nothing else.
No Greek, no Latin.
Was there an undergraduate degree major available then?
There was in French and Spanish.
Describe in general what students took the courses.
we still have a good many requirements.
The students in, before college broke up into science, education, and liberal arts, had a foreign language requirement, two years of one foreign language.
We got a lot of those.
And we also had many of those PhD candidates.
And they took some formal courses?
Formal courses.
Were there many majoring in language?
No, very few.
Very, very few.
And no master's degree?
At that point, no, but the master's in Spanish came fairly early.
Really?
Do you remember how that came about?
I wasn't really involved in that.
Number one, I was still a lowly assistant professor.
Number two, I wasn't in the Spanish section.
And was the impetus for that master's degree, did it come from within the department or did it come from above?
It came from within.
Within?
Yeah.
Was there any opposition as far as you know?
Well, there was some opposition on the part of the coordinating board.
Oh, okay.
Who were the key people that made it happen?
There was a gentleman named Jim Ward.
I don't remember much, I don't know where he is, except that he went from here to Puerto Rico.
And there were Jack Dabbs himself across Bush.
Excuse me.
Wait a second.
Got it, thank you.
I don't want to stop talking here.
Of course.
That's all right.
My brain wasn't working.
Can I bring you a glass of water?
How about that graduate program and how it came to be?
The graduate program in Spanish really took off very, very slowly.
It picked up
a good deal after I retired.
I heard from various former colleagues, but for a long time it sort of limped along.
And were there some graduate students very quickly after it was approved?
No, that was the problem.
Oh.
We had the program, but we really didn't have enough students for it.
And Dean Hubert, was he still?
No, by that time, Dean Maxwell was there.
Dean Maxwell, and I'm assuming that he was supportive of it.
He was very supportive.
Dave was very supportive of innovation, particularly in my department.
He didn't get along well with check baths.
Ah.
As you were a beginning faculty member,
Did anyone ever come to you and give you advice as a young, new faculty member?
No.
No?
But you know, I grew up with a father who wasn't academic, a husband who wasn't academic.
A father-in-law was also an academic.
He taught Scandinavian languages at the University of Nebraska for years.
So I was pretty much into that.
In those early years of your faculty assignment, what were your teaching responsibilities?
What courses normally did you teach, and what was the normal load?
We had terrible, terrible teaching loads.
I remember teaching 18 semester hours, one hard one semester, 21.
Nobody thought anything of it, you know.
Jack would just give me my schedule and here you are.
And what courses were they most often?
Mostly the very introductory first and second year language.
Spanish and French?
French and German.
Oh, French and German.
My Spanish isn't good enough to do anything well.
What about, did you get to teach some junior, senior?
I did after a while.
Again, we had to, basically my teaching field is French.
French literature, language and literature.
We had to build up enough
students to get into the upper level courses.
And then we started, we added junior and senior level courses, and I taught those regularly.
And that began to happen in the late 60s?
Just about.
Okay.
And you all were quartered, your offices were then on the first floor of the academic?
Right.
And we got moved back and forth, but it was always on the first floor of the academic building.
You remember there used to be that big parking lot behind the academic?
I could sit at my desk and see my car.
Then they took the lot away.
My car went somewhere else.
But we went somewhere else, and we went to the other end where the dean's office had been originally, because Dean Maxwell moved into Harrington.
And who were your closest faculty friends and associates in those years?
In those years?
Well, I was close to, let's see,
Some of the people that we hired during those years mainly, because the old timers, now from my current status of old timer, I can laugh at it, but there were basically three or four
elderly senior full professors.
Jack Dabbs, Ed Breitenkamp, and Jay Skrivarnik, and I lost somebody somewhere.
And I never was very
socially or in any other way involved with them.
We had good professional relationships, but they were so much older than I was at the time that there wasn't much there.
But some of my very good friends still were the—what do you call them?
Think of their names.
They were all people who had joined the faculty relatively recently.
newer people.
Some of them have not fared too well lately at A&M, but anyway, the Nodos, N-A-U-D-E-A-U, were very nice people from France.
Well, he's from France, he's not.
They came into the department and
After that we began sort of having a different group, grouping.
Did the department have social activities together?
Yes, quite a lot.
Well actually some of the people that I associated the most with were the Koepkes, because Wolf Koepke was, he came from Rice, along with two other people, Hans Popper and Lee Stabenhagen.
But I was never that close to those two, but I was very close to Wolf.
Wolf was sort of became, by dint of accomplishment, I think, in personality, the senior man in the department.
Now, after Dr. Dabbs as department head, who was the... I was.
I came in right after Jeff.
Oh, you did?
In what year?
Uh, 73.
So he served many years.
Yep.
Many years.
Well, he stayed and taught a couple more years.
But, I mean, he had been the department head for...
You know, since the founding of A&M, they had, up to that point, only been three department heads.
Oh, that's marvelous.
I'm glad you mentioned that.
That's remarkable.
Joe Wolcott, Dr. Campbell, Joe I knew, Campbell I didn't know, and Jack Dabbs.
Jersey Joe Wolcott, W-O-O-L-K-E-T.
And I was number four.
In the 70s, mind you.
All right, as you began, what kind of library quality did we have?
I'm not sure you want to hear this.
No, it was pitiful, I think.
Pitiful, absolutely pitiful, and it stayed pitiful until I retired.
Not on particularly good terms with Irene.
She was already thinking very much in terms of technology and if you don't need all this stuff, you can do it on the computer, you know.
And I said, I want my students, my literature students, to be able to browse, to pick up a book, open it, and see what it looks like to see a French page.
You know, they've never seen it.
We did not, as far as research goes, that was a zilch.
But there wasn't really enough for the undergraduates.
So we kept trying to eventually build up a fairly good body of books for the undergraduates.
Now, in the department, within the department, was there particular competition between the Spanish, the French, the German?
For books?
Or for anything?
No, not really.
We pretty much went our own way, which was good, otherwise there would have been more clashes.
And there was not a feeling that this language is getting more emphasis than it deserves?
I was never able to pinpoint that.
Nobody ever mentioned it.
faculty member come and say, well, Spanish is getting all this and German is not.
That never happened.
As far as you recall, down through the years, which language generated more student credit hours?
Spanish.
And then French?
And then French.
I forgot to mention, we also taught Russian.
Oh.
I forgot that.
Again, that limped along for quite a while, and eventually we got some really good people on the faculty for Russian, and it picked up.
Who were those Russian additions?
Gosh.
I'm getting very bad on them.
Well, we'll get that in the second edition.
First name is Olga.
She's still on the property.
And Olga somebody.
She and her husband are both on.
She is a very interesting, very, very nice person, born in Paris, of Russian parents.
So she came
up bilingually.
Married an American, her English is flawless.
You'd never know she was Native.
So that became a much more interesting area.
Did you all ever propose to add some language that was?
Yes.
Repeatedly.
What languages did you all propose that were turned down?
Well, let's see.
At one time we proposed Italian because we had a lot of students of Italian background who wanted to get a year or two of Italian.
And the coordinating board shut that one down.
Really?
And said Italian is being taught everywhere else already.
You don't need it.
And it took us a good while.
to get the classical languages approved.
As a matter of fact, Greek didn't get approved until after I had retired.
And we've been trying for a long time because we seem to have had some interest from students who wanted to go to a seminary and who wanted to have the Latin and the Greek.
And I never quite
I never felt very certain that we would have had enough students to really fill classes for that.
But there was some demand, definitely.
When you were a young faculty member, before you became department head, if you felt you needed advice on something, to whom did you turn for advice and counsel?
Well, let's see.
To be honest, probably to my husband, because he had been on the faculty much longer than I had, and knew his way around better than I did.
And you said no one came to you and gave you advice about how to be an A&M faculty?
No.
What did you think was appropriate for you in terms of dress?
Well, that was interesting.
I have always, my whole life, I think I'm basically a conservative person in dress, at least.
And I've always dressed, you know, conservatively for work.
I never wore pants.
That was something that happened about that time around the early 70s, 74, 75, I had a delegation of two of my faculty members
female faculty members, coming and asking me what I thought might happen if we wore pants.
And by that time, things had loosened up.
And I said, as far as I'm concerned, no jeans, no blue jeans, but pants, pantsuits, fine.
So they all started doing nothing.
I really never did until much, much later.
And of course, no shorts for faculty.
Oh, gosh.
Who ever heard of it?
And no sandals.
We had one interesting experience.
There's one gentleman with whom him and his wife became very good friends, the Costas, who became department head after me.
Luis had been teaching at Vassar, and he came here for his interview.
I can see him today.
bare feet, sandals, long hair, huge beard all over.
And you know, it was kind of funny.
I liked him from the beginning, even though his appearance wasn't very promising.
And David Maxwell didn't care for him at all.
Finally, the faculty voted to offer him a position.
And I was talking to David about it, and David said, well, you can have him if you want to, but I don't think you're getting much.
So now, well, now, even 15 years ago, you wouldn't have recognized that young man.
He is the best dressed, best looking young man you can find anywhere.
He still has a beard, neatly trimmed.
He's the one who once came to me and said,
would you do something about Joe somebody who was a teaching assistant?
And I said, why?
What?
He said, you notice how grody he looks?
I just nearly died.
And I just said, you know, Luis?